So you saw them coming and you were getting ready to
attack? Yeah, we were getting ready to attack. And
how many were you? Was it just your tanks? In my area
of responsibility, they had ten German tanks and I
think I had full strength. I had fifteen or sixteen
anyway. The platoons were in pretty good shape.
They come out as if they were going to attack me. And
what they're doing, they're dragging those 10
tanks. They drug four anti-tank guns behind them
and put them in a position in which we couldn't see.
Dig them in in the sand and get them set up. And then
as they dropped off these, they're moving on
toward us. And we start exchanging fire. And they
withdraw. And their tactics is for me to go charge
it in there and get them, you know, as they pull out.
And they draw me right into these four anti-tank
guns. Well,
I had, you know, you have to study the enemy or
you're foolish if you don't. So we had... read
about this, of them doing this against the British
down in Eighth Army. And I talked to my executive
officer, the lieutenant of the captain. I said,
you know, I think we better be careful. I said, I
think we better send one platoon off around this
flag here. feel this situation out, and I said, we
better stay here and overwatch them. Okay. Well,
that's exactly what happened. They hadn't moved a
thousand meters until they started drawing fire
from these anti-tank guns that these guys,
jokers, had dropped off there and put nets over,
sand-colored nets. When they did that, we just
poured the fire from the rest of our tanks right in
on them and brought the artillery in on them and
killed every damn one of them. I never lost a tank.
Then we just moved out on through them and we
engaged the Germans at that. So then you started
chasing the Germans after that? Well, we started
moving them and waiting for our other elements to
move up and we went forward.
Most of them got away. We knocked out a few. I can't
remember now, three or four of them, but most of
them would get away. You just don't go chase each
other in the desert. You just don't know what the
hell. You just can't afford to get yourself out on a
goddamn limb as a part of the team.
And so the whole line of assault was moving. Yeah,
everybody moves. What you do is you take
intermediate objective. You take your
objective, and when you get orders to move your
next objective, it means you don't move there
until the commander decided that everybody's on
his intermediate objective, and you just keep
moving forward. You have objectives to... Sure.
Every guy's got an objective. If this guy's on his
objective, it may enhance the movement of these
others to get on the objective, but you don't let
this guy go on to the next and next and next until
everybody... because this guy could end up
getting himself cut off out there and screwing up
the whole damn plan of action. When did you next see
some combat? Then we saw combat on the way into...
We were in and out of combat almost every day until
the campaign was over. In the Kass area? Yeah,
yeah. And on into Brazardia and Tunisia. And then
from Sicily— Wait a minute now. Were the Germans
basically doing defensive tactics? Yeah,
falling back. Falling back slowly, just trying to
hold you— Falling back, and the damn Italians,
they were giving up. They were poor fighters. They
were a hell of a liability the Germans had.
They'd try to give up in the evening, you know, when
they'd smell us out cooking some, brewing up some
coffee or something outside the tank late in the
evening, you know, heat up some meat or something,
you know, canned meat or something. They'd smell
that. They'd be laying away over there in the
desert. They'd come in under a white flag and want
to give up. And... Have some dinner. They just
wanted something to eat. Hell, they don't fight.
They complained about the Germans... They
complained about the Germans wouldn't repair
their vehicles in the workshop, and they didn't
have vehicles that were in bad shape, and they
couldn't fight very well. Hell, they couldn't
have fought very well if they'd had brand new
vehicles.
God. But anyway, they were a hell of a liability.
I asked a German lieutenant colonel we'd captured
one time about how well those Italians fought. He
said, well, from what I see, about like you're
American Negro. Well, I'll tell you what, he
didn't know American Negro as well as I do, because
I tell you, I had some hellacious fighters out of
the American Negro, I'll tell you that.
How'd you get along with some of the captured
Germans? Did you ever talk to them? Well, I almost
went to jail over an Italian lieutenant general in
Sicily who wanted to take all of his steamer trunks
to the prison camp with him, and he refused to get
him back in a two-and-a-half-ton truck with about
50 other Italians. He complained, and
Eisenhower, I guess, had it all investigated.
Anyway, nobody could ever find out who the guy was
that asked the sergeant to put this guy on board and
get him down to LSD and to hell with his damn steamer
trunks. They just never did find out too much about
who in the hell that was. Maybe they purposely
didn't want to find out. But I didn't have much to
do. As the war went on, I did a lot, I guess, for
German soldiers that were wounded.
I tried to take care of every one of them as I would
expect him to do my soldier.
Did you give them pretty good care then? Oh,
absolutely, absolutely.
As you know, the commanders carried morphine
syrettes after a battle was over. I remember one
battle,
November 16th, 17th, and 18th of November 1944.
One of my tanks had blown up a German assault gun.
The one soldier still alive had been blown out of
the thing, and his leg was all gone, and he was
bleeding to death except a piece of skin. So I took a
surgical kit that I carried with me, cut that leg
off, put a tourniquet on it, cut that leg off,
covered it with sulfanilamide powder. That's
about the only antibody we had. Give him a shot of
morphine. bound that up, called my doctor, Swab,
forward, Captain Swab, hello, great little
surgeon, and he brought up a half-track, armored
half-track, picked him up, and saved his life.
That's what I'd expect them to do for me. And I think
that they did, in every instance that they had the
capability to do, but you've got to understand
that If you don't have capability, you can be
accused of a lot of things. A German soldier was
having a hell of a time from
1944 onward for supplies and something to eat.
They were just having a hell of a time.
So sometime I guess our people didn't receive
proper care because it wasn't there. Now let's
switch to Sicily. Did your command change?
I was put in a position as a company maintenance
officer for a maintenance company because of my
background. and was later promoted to major just
after the Sicilian campaign.
I was responsible for the maintenance of the
entire regiment. I kept that through Sicily. In
other words, they took your command away then? No,
I was given another command, but one in which a
major commanded instead of a captain. Oh, I see.
The maintenance company had 12 tanks in it, in
addition to all the maintenance capability for
the whole regiment, 156 times three and the same
number of half-track vehicles.
The Sicilian campaign lasted about a month. I
supported that operation. Then we left every
vehicle behind and went to England. Got into
England in November, Thanksgiving Day, in
Burrock, Scotland. And there we began to totally
re-equip. And now my maintenance experience, I
can understand now what they were doing, what they
had in mind. I didn't know at the time. But then—
Were you sad that you weren't going to be on an
invasion of Italy? They had decided that the
Second Armored Division and the First Infantry
Division were going to go to England, so we did. The
Second Armored and the First Infantry. The only
other division in my lifetime that I wanted to
serve with in combat that I had great admiration
and respect for other than the Second Armored
Division was the First Infantry Division. And
would you believe, my first general officer, I had
a general officer assignment when I was the first
infantry brigade in Vietnam. I was very happy
about this whole thing throughout my 36 years.
So you went up to England in November of 43. Yeah, I
got there on Thanksgiving Day. And we started
receiving new equipment, later model equipment,
totally. It took every day we had until we took off
and loaded up down at Portsmouth for the invasion.
Were you in on any of the planning or were you just
basically maintenance? Oh, I had all the planning
for all the maintenance and logistic side of it.
before my regiment. And then we went to,
we were in Normandy, and I kept that maintenance
company until October
the 1st,
1944. And then I become commander of the second
battalion, the tank, the second battalion of the
67th Armored Regiment. Tank battalion now, a
whole battalion. Now, tell me about Normandy.
When did you go on D-plus-1? D-plus-1, yeah,
D-plus-1. And we were bombed severely and killed a
Sergeant Major there. And we
fought the hedgerows. You see, I had 12 tanks of my
own. And we got all, everybody got involved in the
St. Louis breakthrough.
One of the reasons I guess I went to the 2nd
Battalion when I took a battalion, when I got
around to being eligible to be promoted to
lieutenant colonel and they wanted to give me a
battalion on the 1st of October of 1944 was I had
many times taken my 12 tanks out of the maintenance
company as such and went with the 2nd Battalion. So
I knew them very well and worked with them very
well. As far as the battalion was concerned, what
was your response? About how many tanks were you
responsible for? I had 57
tanks, 3 assault guns. That's a total of 60. I had
then had a task force that usually gave me from one
company to two companies of infantry. And during
the drive
from the Rhine River to the Elbe River, I had a,
remember now I'm a major, still, about to be
promoted to lieutenant colonel, but I'm a major. I
had attached to me a battalion of infantry,
commanded by a lieutenant colonel, and a direct
support battalion of artillery, 105
self-propelled artillery, commanded by a
lieutenant colonel. I had a tank destroyer
company, and I had a reconnaissance troop and I'm a
major, and I command this whole entire task force
with two lieutenant colonels under me in support.
How is that possible? It's a matter of, I guess, of
who can do what. And rank has not anything to do with
it when you really get the responsibility. It's
kind of like a brigadier general, you know,
commanding a division.
Absolutely. It just never happened in a
peacetime. Never happened. But wartime, that's
different. Who can do what? Exactly. Who can do
what? That's what it's all about. That's the
reason why sometimes I've had, even in a Vietnam
conflict, I've had a little private command in a
rifle company. because he had the radio and the
company commander was down here somewhere and
couldn't get to the damn radio. And I said, son,
you're in command as far as I'm concerned. Now
here's what we're going to do.
Well, a little private doing that. Why not? All you
got to do is do what I tell him to do.
That's the way it goes. That's the kind of little
guy that, when he does a hell of a good job, as soon as
you can, go land down there and pin a damn medal on
him and help him send it back to his mama before he
gets killed.
It's no fun presenting medals to mamas and papas
posthumously. Let him send it home while he's
alive.
What was the first action that you saw after
Normandy?
Then the daylights bombed out of us, I guess, by
Luftwaffe. They were very active. We were
supposed to have air superiority, but our air
superiority was so high that they had air
superiority.
We had the bombers, but they had the fighter
bombers. Yeah, that's right. And they were
ME-109s and FW-190s. Oh, yeah. And the one that hit
us was a HE-111
with a 4,000-pound bomb. And that was kind of a
record. It brought out the whole air ministry from
England to look at the crater. There were chunks.
It went so deep that there were chunks of clay, not
square, but we'll just use, for example, 10 feet
square. That'd be about the size of this room here,
I guess. It came down and burst open a half-track,
armored half-track vehicle. That's how deep and
how big it was. The crater across the top was
about... 40 meters I guess. This was really a load
and it must have been a delayed fuse that they had on
it. We saw him coming and he was very low level and of
course we had 50 calibers to shoot at him but we
never did hit anything. We shot at one ME-109 when
we were on the, we just got in on the beach. It was D
plus one, early on D plus one. And we began to spread
out and get ourselves sorted out. Here come a
ME-109 and everybody started firing at him and
they killed a Spitfire that was following him,
that was chasing him. So you see how bad things can
get. And this kind of upset the Brits, RAF. But this
HE-111 came in. We were shooting at him. It didn't
make any difference. He was very low, I'd say a
thousand feet. Boy, he hit right in the middle of
the second battalion. But everybody spread out
and just tore up the battalion headquarters.
But then the St. Louis.
How many of these tanks were damaged on an attack
like that? Well, it busted up five of the
half-track type armored vehicles in the
headquarters and turned over two tanks. Through
Major Smith, the executive officer, about a
hundred meters.
Did he survive? Yes, sir, and let me tell you
something. He went to the hospital, and they let
him come back in about a week, 10 days. And I was a
commander then of the battalion, and he was my
executive. Everybody, you know, people
complained to me about him being irritable. They
said, Major Smith, he's kind of irritable. He's
always irritable. Nothing suits him. That's what
some of the company commanders said to me. I said,
well, I'll talk to him. And I said, I appreciate you
telling me. So I was sitting down with him one
evening. We had a hard day. And I said, Smitty, how
do you feel? He said, well, I'll tell you. He said,
that German artillery today just tore me up. Every
round of that artillery just seemed like my head
was breaking open. I said, well, look, when did all
this start? He said, after we got bombed down on the
beach.
I said, would you relent to going back to the
hospital and getting this checked out again and
then come right on back? He said, well, it's
getting to where it hurt me so bad, I think I'll I
think I'll, I don't want to leave. I want to come
back. I said, okay, well, let's go get this checked
out, and then you can come back. Named Jerome
Smith, one hell of a great guy. And he went back, and
they found a hairline crack in his skull. He'd been
living with this now for about six months, and I can
imagine artillery tearing him up. Gee whiz. Isn't
that something? Hairline crack in his skull that
they hadn't found before. So he had to come back.
You just don't know how much pain a guy goes through
at that sort of time. But he didn't know, you know.
So he went on to come on back to the States.
But
Normandy was a nightmare.
After the breakthrough,
Germans scattered all over the place. They were
trying to withdraw, and we were getting orders to
move.
I get around to Brits. Brits are wonderful guys and
soldiers, but their high command is so
methodical, and they take so much time, and
they're so careful. And you know, to the Brits,
hell, what difference did it make to them whether
the war lasted five years or fifteen years? You
just thought that the British were much too slow
then. That's much too slow. So you agreed with what
Patton had to say about Montgomery? Absolutely,
absolutely. Take advantage of the breaks that you
see on the battlefield and exploit them. Besides
that, what did you think of their soldiering? Oh, I
thought they were fantastic soldiers. Oh, yes.
Fantastic system for training their officers and
their men, but they just, God damn it, are slow as
hell. And
they take their time about what they're doing.
They do a good job, but my God, they're slow.
Anyway, at Barrington, I was sent around behind at
Barrington, France, to close off the Falaise Gap
Park.
I never will forget, too, a couple of my tanks were
occupying a roadblock where we had the Germans
trapped. in the fillet's pocket. This was before
we crossed the river and headed on up toward
Belgium.
Here came two old armored cars up the road, and my
guys were ready to, they had one German come down,
and they let that German get down within 100 meters
before they blew his motorcycle up They blew a
motorcycle up with a tank gun? Yeah, they hit him
with a 75 millimeter about 150 meters or
something like that. Well, I guess it was an hour or
so, here came these two armored cars and they were
about to get it when we had a radio set up on a British
radio that was supposed to tie up with
it. So these two tank crews were told that there was
a possibility of British, so we let them come up and
challenge them. It was in the daytime, so they came
up and we identified them as British. You know, one
of my sergeants, they were from, they were tanked
from a vehicle from across the street there. He
said, hey, where you limeys been? And he said,
don't limey me, we're Canucks. He's from Canada.
And then we pulled the hell out of there and got
going and getting ready to go to, uh, They got their
break. We got that broke through, and they had
squeezed up a bunch of Germans
in there, and so everybody started moving. They
went up to Belgium, Porte-Brasil, Antwerp, and we
headed off toward Liège and Maastricht, Holland,
and into Germany across the Siegfried Line. Now
tell me, what impact did the Battle of the Bulge
have on you? Yeah, well, I was a battalion
commander then. And
first off, we had fought. Were you a part of the
Third Army then? No, I was still in the Second
Armored Division, but it took it away from Bradley
and gave it to Montgomery, my part of it, up to
North. Now I'm under Montgomery. So you were under
Montgomery. Yeah, I'm now under Montgomery. I
took it away from Bradley. Preceding involves, by
a month, we had jumped off on the 16th of November
between the Siegfried Line, we were past the
Siegfried Line, between the Worm and the Rohrer
River, and we were fishing up that place called
Lenik and Julik on the Rohrer River. And Julek
sports plots, which has been recorded in history
as a great hangout, holdout for the Germans there.
We moved, I was commanding the battalion then, and
we attacked on the 16th, 17th. I finally took my
objective on the 18th. And as the 66th Regiment and
the 67th Regiment and I had the 2nd Battalion of the
67th Regiment, jumped off, pushed the Ruhr River
at 8 o'clock on the morning of the 16th.
Two German tank regiments, we found out later,
jumped off from their positions at 8 o'clock in the
morning to push us back across the Ruhr River.
And that's probably one of history's meeting
engagements
where a light force is one going to attack the other
force and the other force jumps off unknowingly to
this and neither one of them know and they have a
meeting engagement.
With approximately the equal number of tanks.
Equal number of tanks. I think there's more than
500 in there.
And they had, it was mud, it was coal.
We had no air support. We had tremendous artillery
support. Did the Germans have any air support left
by them? No.
They dropped their last bomb on me on the 6th of
October, as far as I know. I never got bombed any
after that. And that was by a jet aircraft. A jet? A
jet aircraft on the 6th of October, 1944, which
turned out later to be a Me 262, one of the first jet
aircraft in the world.
He dropped this bomb on a hedgerow over here, and I
was on a trail here with a jeep, and it blew this air
out. This one, I guess, busted this one. Didn't
kill anybody and blew us out of the jeep, all three
of us. I was up at the head of a column of tanks
moving. I kind of used my, I had a Jeep with command
radios in it. I had a light tank with command radios
in it. I had a half track with command radios in it. I
had a medium tank with command radios in it. And
that represented my golf bag of tools. Depending
on what the situation was is what I got in. What did
you think when you saw it jump? Well, I knew she was
awful fast and you couldn't see any props. And I
said, man, this looked like another rocket. But
how can a rocket carry a bomb? It was only about a
250-pound bomb. How can a rocket carry a bomb?
That's what I thought. Well, let's get back to your
engagement now in December of 1944.
Two equal forces are heading toward each other.
Yeah, okay. A guy named Batchelder, he had 56 tanks
and a tank destroyer company had 12 tanks. with
90-millimeter guns. Our old tanks had
76-millimeter guns and 75-millimeter guns. He
had a destroyer company. I had a tank destroyer
company. No, I did not have a tank destroyer
company. I had a platoon of four, 90-millimeter.
When we jumped off, they jumped off. Harry
Hilliard He had the First Battalion.
We all started out with 56 tanks. But Batcheller
had a whole company of tank destroyers out of the
701st Tank Destroyer. I believe he had, at least I
know he had a platoon, because he had one tank
destroyer that hit. It was a diesel engine,
something that I'd recommended for the whole Army
back when I was testing them in the desert, that we
have diesel engines. It was hit 13 times before
they were caught on fire. Of course, there was
nobody alive in it anyway, but it was shot up 13
times because the Germans determined they were
going to set every one of our tanks on fire.
Batchelor ended up out of his 56th battalion with
19. 19 surviving tanks. 19 surviving tanks, and
some of those had weapons busted on them, you know,
a shell fragment that cut them up. I had
thirty-three left. Healyard had twenty-one. Now
out of my thirty-three, most of the main gun would
operate on, but some maybe the coaxial fifty
caliber or thirty caliber wouldn't work on
because of the shell fragments and the plus
amount. I was ordered then to go take the major main
objective of their strength assault. How did the
Germans do? Tell me in this. Okay, Germans. Was it a
field or a forest? No, it was a wide open mud
terrain. A few scattered little villages. Low
clouding, clanging clouds, foggish, muddy,
cold, November type, northern Europe.
In the afternoon, it was a kind of a Spanish
standoff. In the afternoon, their two major
regiments started withdrawing, and they
deployed their 505th Heavy Panzer Battalion,
which had 22 Tiger Royals. Tiger Royals had the
88-millimeter gun, but my God, they had so much
armor on them that instead of weighing them, 40
tons. They weighed up to close to 60 tons. So they
were pretty slow. Real slow and forklift-like
guys. But good maneuverability in the mud. They
deployed those. One of my sergeants, if that had
got into us, you see, our guns wouldn't penetrate
their tanks. We had to The only way we'd penetrate
their tanks really is to get up within 800 yards of
them, 4 to 800 yards. And with those 88-millimeter
guns, they'd penetrate us out 1,000 yards, 1,200
yards. So it made a hell of a—hell of a— So what did
you do, stay back? Well, no, we just pounded the
hell out of them and just keep fighting them and
maneuver again and try to get on their flanks, you
know, and hit them in the flank where they're soft
instead of taking them head on. It was hard to
maneuver and they were maneuvering to beat hell in
that mud with a big wide track and our tracks were
much narrower. But anyway, we just kept pouring in
there and One of my little sergeants, this is
probably a historical mark, fired 32 battalion
time on target of 105, 155, 8-inch gun, 8-inch
howitzer. An 8-inch howitzer round is 298 pounds.
A gun round, I believe, is a little heavier, about
the same, I guess. 96 pounds on a 155 and a lesser
amount on a 105. But 32 battalions, 32 times 12
times 18 in some instances. This would give you 32
times 12 is a good balance. That number of guns were
the rounds all hitting and exploding at the same
time. A little sergeant did that. Brought all that
artillery in. Artillery in World War II was the
best arm that we had in our army. In Vietnam, it was
the lousiest. That's how we progressed with our
artillery. All rounds hit on those 22 tanks at the
same time. No kidding? Every round burst at the
same time. This was so devastating.
to those tanks that they left three dead ones and
they had two or three cripples and the rest of them
withdrew. That's what firepower will do for you.
Then it went on until— So your artillery was behind
you shooting over you— Over me, absolutely. I
never got a chance to engage them. It wouldn't have
done any good anyway because they'd have knocked
me out.
Soils. It killed us. Soils. Day after day after day
after day of the utilization of massive
firepower. And that's been a key to my whole
tactical philosophy. of used firepower, you make
that by hand. Don't use soldiers. They're
important. They're made by God, grace of God. So
why use something important? People are
important. Use some cheap materialistic thing.
So did you, as far as your tanks were concerned, did
you try to hold them back then and just continue to
maneuver while the Tigers were pounding at you?
No, what we did, this was late in the day, Now the
other two regiments that attacked us withdrew,
and they were using this as their last gas, and they
withdrew. Why did they withdraw? Because of the
artillery? No, because of our tank action. We
killed a lot of their tanks. I see. Because you
could deal with it lighter. Yeah, they're
lighter. They're Mark Fours and Mark Fives,
yes. It's
getting dark, and we're consolidating our
losses, getting casualties back. We're
refueling, re-ammoing, trying to get our stuff
together, and still keeping the artillery on
them. And next morning again, we jump off during
the night. The assessment's made.
Hollingsworth, Task Force Hollingsworth, you go
take Gernsweiler, their regimental objective,
or the combat command B objective. So I did. How
many tanks did you have left, 33? 33. So you took
your 33 tanks? Yep, and went on and took the
objective. And what was defending the objective?
Not too much. A few German tanks, most of them had
withdrawn. but the most devastating artillery
that I had received during the war. So the Germans
were waiting for you then? The Germans were
waiting for us, and they occupied the high ground
on the other side of the Ruhr River.
They had the observation on me, and I had to go take
that objective anyway. How many casualties did
you take? I had
four more, about five more tanks hit from enemy
artillery. Before you could wipe out their
artillery? Yeah, before we could get our
artillery in range to hit them.
I don't know how many people I had dead and wounded.
I had a lot of wounded, but not so many dead. And I
had, while we were, I had an assault gun. That was a
105 short barrel gun on a M4 tank chassis. I had
three of those in the platoon to fire indirect.
They could fire direct, but they made to fire
indirect. They represented just a half of a
battery of artillery in that part. The artillery
was so bad, the enemy artillery was so bad, they
were hitting, destroying everything. One round
hit right next to my headquarters, which is in this
little old village of Gernsweiler. We tried to
remote our radio down into the basements, you
know, To save the soldiers, we'd just leave a radio
outside in the armored vehicles with the sandbags
and that sort of stuff around the tank. We'd just
remote those down in there and operate from down in
there. Infantry and the tanks married up out to
defend the Gernsweiler. And a round came in, a very
heavy round, a 150 caliber bore. And it hit on the
deck of one of those assault guns, and the little
guys were down inside. And I knew that round had hit
very close, so I get outside, and sure enough, in
the midst of this heavy concentration, it hit this
tank. I got up on the back end of that tank. They had
clothing, and they had camouflage nets and that
sort of stuff, and that stuff was all on fire. And I
kicked this fire off. in that artillery and got
down in the tank and the little guys was all right
and I said you can either stay out here or you can
come with me down in this basement because there's
no way you can fire out here accurately and do any
good with this incoming artillery like it is. They
said sir we'll stay in here don't you want to stay
with us I said no I said I've got this fire out out
here now you're going to be all right and I'll go
back I said I got to get back and get on that command
radio so I do in about a month's time I get called up
to the and things was quieted down, I guess, in not
quite a month's time. We pulled into a place called
Oad Wilder to get refitted and get ourselves
sorted out and we were gonna have Thanksgiving
dinner down there, whatever it was. Christmas
dinner? No, Thanksgiving, because this battle
was over and then on the 18th or 19th we got pulled
out and we went into a little old town just south of
there named Oad Wilder Eighteenth or nineteenth
of November. Yeah. So, we were going to get new
equipment on the floor. That had to come up from the
bases down south.